waterquality/README.md, before:

# National Water Quality Monitoring Council

## Download data
To retrieve data:

- Go to https://www.waterqualitydata.us/
- Under Location, select 'US' and 'US:AZ' and 'UA:AZ:025' (Yavapai County, but I included Apache, Cochise, and Greenlea, too)
- Under Sampling Parameters, Sampling Media, select 'Water' and 'water'
- Under Sampling Parameters, Characteristic Group, select 'Inorganics, Major Metals' and 'Inorganics, Minor Metals'
- Under Select data to download, select 'Sample results (narrow)'
- Under File Format, select 'Comma-separated’

https://www.waterqualitydata.us/portal/#countrycode=US&statecode=US%3A04&countycode=US%3A04%3A001&countycode=US%3A04%3A003&countycode=US%3A04%3A011&countycode=US%3A04%3A025&sampleMedia=water&sampleMedia=Water&characteristicType=Inorganics%2C%20Major%2C%20Metals&characteristicType=Inorganics%2C%20Minor%2C%20Metals&mimeType=csv


### Data

Data looks like this:

```
// ****** Record 1 ****** //
OrganizationIdentifier                         : USGS-AZ
OrganizationFormalName                         : USGS Arizona Water Science Center
ActivityIdentifier                             : nwisaz.01.98500948
ActivityStartDate                              : 1985-04-25
ActivityStartTime/Time                         : 
ActivityStartTime/TimeZoneCode                 : 
MonitoringLocationIdentifier                   : USGS-09396100
ResultIdentifier                               : NWIS-48614982
DataLoggerLine                                 : 
ResultDetectionConditionText                   : 
MethodSpecificationName                        : 
CharacteristicName                             : Calcium
ResultSampleFractionText                       : Total
ResultMeasureValue                             : 310
ResultMeasure/MeasureUnitCode                  : mg/l CaCO3
MeasureQualifierCode                           : 
ResultStatusIdentifier                         : Historical
StatisticalBaseCode                            : 
ResultValueTypeName                            : Actual
ResultWeightBasisText                          : 
ResultTimeBasisText                            : 
ResultTemperatureBasisText                     : 
ResultParticleSizeBasisText                    : 
PrecisionValue                                 : 
DataQuality/BiasValue                          : 
ConfidenceIntervalValue                        : 
UpperConfidenceLimitValue                      : 
LowerConfidenceLimitValue                      : 
ResultCommentText                              : 
USGSPCode                                      : 00910
ResultDepthHeightMeasure/MeasureValue          : 
ResultDepthHeightMeasure/MeasureUnitCode       : 
ResultDepthAltitudeReferencePointText          : 
ResultSamplingPointName                        : 
BiologicalIntentName                           : 
BiologicalIndividualIdentifier                 : 
SubjectTaxonomicName                           : 
UnidentifiedSpeciesIdentifier                  : 
SampleTissueAnatomyName                        : 
GroupSummaryCountWeight/MeasureValue           : 
GroupSummaryCountWeight/MeasureUnitCode        : 
CellFormName                                   : 
CellShapeName                                  : 
HabitName                                      : 
VoltismName                                    : 
TaxonomicPollutionTolerance                    : 
TaxonomicPollutionToleranceScaleText           : 
TrophicLevelName                               : 
FunctionalFeedingGroupName                     : 
TaxonomicDetailsCitation/ResourceTitleName     : 
TaxonomicDetailsCitation/ResourceCreatorName   : 
TaxonomicDetailsCitation/ResourceSubjectText   : 
TaxonomicDetailsCitation/ResourcePublisherName : 
TaxonomicDetailsCitation/ResourceDate          : 
TaxonomicDetailsCitation/ResourceIdentifier    : 
FrequencyClassInformationUrl                   : 
ResultAnalyticalMethod/MethodIdentifier        : 
ResultAnalyticalMethod/MethodIdentifierContext : 
ResultAnalyticalMethod/MethodName              : 
ResultAnalyticalMethod/MethodUrl               : 
ResultAnalyticalMethod/MethodQualifierTypeName : 
MethodDescriptionText                          : 
LaboratoryName                                 : 
AnalysisStartDate                              : 
AnalysisStartTime/Time                         : 
AnalysisStartTime/TimeZoneCode                 : 
AnalysisEndDate                                : 
AnalysisEndTime/Time                           : 
AnalysisEndTime/TimeZoneCode                   : 
ResultLaboratoryCommentCode                    : 
ResultLaboratoryCommentText                    : 
ResultDetectionQuantitationLimitUrl            : 
LaboratoryAccreditationIndicator               : 
LaboratoryAccreditationAuthorityName           : 
TaxonomistAccreditationIndicator               : 
TaxonomistAccreditationAuthorityName           : 
LabSamplePreparationUrl                        : 
ProviderName                                   : NWIS
```

To get stations.csv, change "data to download" to "Site data only":

```
$ csvchk station.csv
// ****** Record 1 ****** //
OrganizationIdentifier                          : USGS-AZ
OrganizationFormalName                          : USGS Arizona Water Science Center
MonitoringLocationIdentifier                    : AZ014-312040109153501
MonitoringLocationName                          : D-24-30 14BDA2 UNSURV
MonitoringLocationTypeName                      : Well
MonitoringLocationDescriptionText               :
HUCEightDigitCode                               : 15080302
DrainageAreaMeasure/MeasureValue                :
DrainageAreaMeasure/MeasureUnitCode             :
ContributingDrainageAreaMeasure/MeasureValue    :
ContributingDrainageAreaMeasure/MeasureUnitCode :
LatitudeMeasure                                 : 31.34454829000000
LongitudeMeasure                                : -109.2603377000000
SourceMapScaleNumeric                           : 24000
HorizontalAccuracyMeasure/MeasureValue          : 5
HorizontalAccuracyMeasure/MeasureUnitCode       : seconds
HorizontalCollectionMethodName                  : Interpolated from MAP.
HorizontalCoordinateReferenceSystemDatumName    : NAD83
VerticalMeasure/MeasureValue                    : 3742.
VerticalMeasure/MeasureUnitCode                 : feet
VerticalAccuracyMeasure/MeasureValue            : 5
VerticalAccuracyMeasure/MeasureUnitCode         : feet
VerticalCollectionMethodName                    : Interpolated from topographic map.
VerticalCoordinateReferenceSystemDatumName      : NGVD29
CountryCode                                     : US
StateCode                                       : 04
CountyCode                                      : 003
AquiferName                                     :
FormationTypeText                               :
AquiferTypeName                                 :
ConstructionDateText                            : 19910620
WellDepthMeasure/MeasureValue                   : 580
WellDepthMeasure/MeasureUnitCode                : ft
WellHoleDepthMeasure/MeasureValue               : 580
WellHoleDepthMeasure/MeasureUnitCode            : ft
ProviderName                                    : NWIS
```

## Measurements

Run get_measurements.py to extract the 179 measurments:

* Field 12: CharacteristicName
* Field 15: ResultMeasure/MeasureUnitCode

## Preprocess data

Preprocessed data are available in `scrutinizer.csv`

### Create mapping file

Create a list of unique variables using `cut -d',' -f6,7 scrutinizer.csv | uniq > waterquality_traits.csv`. Note that this is shifted by 1 column to allow for the common in the location column (seperating lat and long). The header row therefore needs to be corrected manually.

Manually edit `waterquality_traits.csv` to fix header row and to add mappings to SRPDIO. Save as `wq-srpdio-mapping.csv`.

Commit message:

update water quality trait list

waterquality/README.md, after:

# National Water Quality Monitoring Council

## Download data
To retrieve data:

- Go to https://www.waterqualitydata.us/
- Under Location, select 'US' and 'US:AZ' and 'UA:AZ:025' (Yavapai County, but I included Apache, Cochise, and Greenlea, too)
- Under Sampling Parameters, Sampling Media, select 'Water' and 'water'
- Under Sampling Parameters, Characteristic Group, select 'Inorganics, Major Metals' and 'Inorganics, Minor Metals'
- Under Select data to download, select 'Sample results (narrow)'
- Under File Format, select 'Comma-separated’

https://www.waterqualitydata.us/portal/#countrycode=US&statecode=US%3A04&countycode=US%3A04%3A001&countycode=US%3A04%3A003&countycode=US%3A04%3A011&countycode=US%3A04%3A025&sampleMedia=water&sampleMedia=Water&characteristicType=Inorganics%2C%20Major%2C%20Metals&characteristicType=Inorganics%2C%20Minor%2C%20Metals&mimeType=csv


### Data

Data looks like this:

```
// ****** Record 1 ****** //
OrganizationIdentifier                         : USGS-AZ
OrganizationFormalName                         : USGS Arizona Water Science Center
ActivityIdentifier                             : nwisaz.01.98500948
ActivityStartDate                              : 1985-04-25
ActivityStartTime/Time                         : 
ActivityStartTime/TimeZoneCode                 : 
MonitoringLocationIdentifier                   : USGS-09396100
ResultIdentifier                               : NWIS-48614982
DataLoggerLine                                 : 
ResultDetectionConditionText                   : 
MethodSpecificationName                        : 
CharacteristicName                             : Calcium
ResultSampleFractionText                       : Total
ResultMeasureValue                             : 310
ResultMeasure/MeasureUnitCode                  : mg/l CaCO3
MeasureQualifierCode                           : 
ResultStatusIdentifier                         : Historical
StatisticalBaseCode                            : 
ResultValueTypeName                            : Actual
ResultWeightBasisText                          : 
ResultTimeBasisText                            : 
ResultTemperatureBasisText                     : 
ResultParticleSizeBasisText                    : 
PrecisionValue                                 : 
DataQuality/BiasValue                          : 
ConfidenceIntervalValue                        : 
UpperConfidenceLimitValue                      : 
LowerConfidenceLimitValue                      : 
ResultCommentText                              : 
USGSPCode                                      : 00910
ResultDepthHeightMeasure/MeasureValue          : 
ResultDepthHeightMeasure/MeasureUnitCode       : 
ResultDepthAltitudeReferencePointText          : 
ResultSamplingPointName                        : 
BiologicalIntentName                           : 
BiologicalIndividualIdentifier                 : 
SubjectTaxonomicName                           : 
UnidentifiedSpeciesIdentifier                  : 
SampleTissueAnatomyName                        : 
GroupSummaryCountWeight/MeasureValue           : 
GroupSummaryCountWeight/MeasureUnitCode        : 
CellFormName                                   : 
CellShapeName                                  : 
HabitName                                      : 
VoltismName                                    : 
TaxonomicPollutionTolerance                    : 
TaxonomicPollutionToleranceScaleText           : 
TrophicLevelName                               : 
FunctionalFeedingGroupName                     : 
TaxonomicDetailsCitation/ResourceTitleName     : 
TaxonomicDetailsCitation/ResourceCreatorName   : 
TaxonomicDetailsCitation/ResourceSubjectText   : 
TaxonomicDetailsCitation/ResourcePublisherName : 
TaxonomicDetailsCitation/ResourceDate          : 
TaxonomicDetailsCitation/ResourceIdentifier    : 
FrequencyClassInformationUrl                   : 
ResultAnalyticalMethod/MethodIdentifier        : 
ResultAnalyticalMethod/MethodIdentifierContext : 
ResultAnalyticalMethod/MethodName              : 
ResultAnalyticalMethod/MethodUrl               : 
ResultAnalyticalMethod/MethodQualifierTypeName : 
MethodDescriptionText                          : 
LaboratoryName                                 : 
AnalysisStartDate                              : 
AnalysisStartTime/Time                         : 
AnalysisStartTime/TimeZoneCode                 : 
AnalysisEndDate                                : 
AnalysisEndTime/Time                           : 
AnalysisEndTime/TimeZoneCode                   : 
ResultLaboratoryCommentCode                    : 
ResultLaboratoryCommentText                    : 
ResultDetectionQuantitationLimitUrl            : 
LaboratoryAccreditationIndicator               : 
LaboratoryAccreditationAuthorityName           : 
TaxonomistAccreditationIndicator               : 
TaxonomistAccreditationAuthorityName           : 
LabSamplePreparationUrl                        : 
ProviderName                                   : NWIS
```

To get stations.csv, change "data to download" to "Site data only":

```
$ csvchk station.csv
// ****** Record 1 ****** //
OrganizationIdentifier                          : USGS-AZ
OrganizationFormalName                          : USGS Arizona Water Science Center
MonitoringLocationIdentifier                    : AZ014-312040109153501
MonitoringLocationName                          : D-24-30 14BDA2 UNSURV
MonitoringLocationTypeName                      : Well
MonitoringLocationDescriptionText               :
HUCEightDigitCode                               : 15080302
DrainageAreaMeasure/MeasureValue                :
DrainageAreaMeasure/MeasureUnitCode             :
ContributingDrainageAreaMeasure/MeasureValue    :
ContributingDrainageAreaMeasure/MeasureUnitCode :
LatitudeMeasure                                 : 31.34454829000000
LongitudeMeasure                                : -109.2603377000000
SourceMapScaleNumeric                           : 24000
HorizontalAccuracyMeasure/MeasureValue          : 5
HorizontalAccuracyMeasure/MeasureUnitCode       : seconds
HorizontalCollectionMethodName                  : Interpolated from MAP.
HorizontalCoordinateReferenceSystemDatumName    : NAD83
VerticalMeasure/MeasureValue                    : 3742.
VerticalMeasure/MeasureUnitCode                 : feet
VerticalAccuracyMeasure/MeasureValue            : 5
VerticalAccuracyMeasure/MeasureUnitCode         : feet
VerticalCollectionMethodName                    : Interpolated from topographic map.
VerticalCoordinateReferenceSystemDatumName      : NGVD29
CountryCode                                     : US
StateCode                                       : 04
CountyCode                                      : 003
AquiferName                                     :
FormationTypeText                               :
AquiferTypeName                                 :
ConstructionDateText                            : 19910620
WellDepthMeasure/MeasureValue                   : 580
WellDepthMeasure/MeasureUnitCode                : ft
WellHoleDepthMeasure/MeasureValue               : 580
WellHoleDepthMeasure/MeasureUnitCode            : ft
ProviderName                                    : NWIS
```

## Measurements

Run get_measurements.py to extract the 179 measurments:

* Field 12: CharacteristicName
* Field 15: ResultMeasure/MeasureUnitCode

## Preprocess data

Preprocessed data are available in `scrutinizer.csv`

### Create mapping file

Create a list of unique variables using `cut -d',' -f6,7 scrutinizer.csv | tail +2 | sort | uniq  > wq_traits.csv`. Note that this is shifted by 1 column to allow for the common in the location column (seperating lat and long). The header row therefore needs to be added manually.

There is still an error because of the value "Sodium, percent total cations". Add "Concentration of Sodium, percent total cations in water" to the second columnnin the sorted, unique file.

Manually edit `wq_traits.csv` to add header row and to add mappings to SRPDIO. Save as `wq-srpdio-mapping.csv`.
